---
layout: post
title: "Elevator Pitch - Knockout JS"
description: "Fast high level summary of Knockout JS and how it can be applied"
tagline: "Fast high level summary of Knockout JS and how it can be applied"
category: programming
tags: [programming, digital services]
---
I haven't blogged anything in ages but I want somewhere I can fire up some quick high level summaries of technologies I'm working with. It's for my own reference really but hopefully if you're reading this you can find some use in it!

# Knockout JS

One of the 10 billion Javascript libraries out there, this one is for building **dynamic UI's with Javascript** using the Model-View-View Model (MVVM) pattern. So basically if you find yourself writing a load of Javascript that's injecting big HTML blobs all over the place, Knockout is your friend.

#### What it is 

* Lightweight & small
* Supported by a ton of browsers
* No dependencies
* Akin to some other frameworks which have data-binding features (Angular, Ember or whatever)

#### What it isn't

* An application framework - it's not like Angular where it drives your entire application, it's just a handy library for easy two-way data binding with some extra plugins you could optionally use such as form validation. It doesn't control how you build the application. In my case I used Knockout with [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org/)

# Knockout 101

Following the key points of MVVM. You define your view-model in Javascript:

```javascript
function AppViewModel() {
    this.firstName = ko.observable("Kyle");
    this.lastName = ko.observable("Davidson");
}

// Activates knockout.js
ko.applyBindings(new AppViewModel());

``` 

You can then bind this to your html (the view) using the `data-bind` attribute:

```html
<p>First name: <strong data-bind="text: firstName"></strong></p>
<p>Last name: <strong data-bind="text: lastName"></strong></p>
```

The text binding assigns text to those DOM elements, using the values from our view-model. The `ko.observable` type will allow our properties to automatically issue notifications whenever their values change. That way any changes to the properties will be reflected on the UI. 

Other popular `data-bind` options:

* `value`: links the associated DOM element’s value with a property on your view model. 

```html
<p>First name: <input data-bind="value: firstName" /></p>
```

* `visible`: causes the associated DOM element to become hidden or visible according to the value you pass to the binding.

```html
<div data-bind="visible: shouldShowMessage">	
    You will see this message only when "shouldShowMessage" holds a true value.
</div>
```

Using a more popular scenario, let's say you wanted to build an HTML list out of an array of objects in Javascript. Using fruit as an example, we can declare a model for our fruit objects and build an observable array in the view model. 

```javascript

// Class to represent a fruit
function Fruit(name, colour, price) {
    var self = this;

    self.name = name;
    self.colour = ko.observable(colour);
    self.price = ko.observable(price); 
}

// Class to represent the view model
function AppViewModel() {
    this.fruits = ko.observableArray([
        new Fruit("Apple", "Green", 3.50),
        new Fruit("Orange", "Orange", 3.40),
        new Fruit("Banana", "Yellow", 3.30)
    ]);
}

// Activates knockout.js
ko.applyBindings(new AppViewModel());

```

Using the `for-each` data-bind option, we can easily generate a list from these objects like so:

```html
<ul data-bind="foreach: fruits">
    <li>Name: <span data-bind="text: name"></span>. Colour: <span data-bind="text: colour"></span>. Price: <span data-bind="text: price"></span> </li>
</ul>
```

Since we're using an observable array, any changes to the `fruits` array will be reflected in the html. 

# Other features
* Computed properties
* Event handlers (click, hover etc.)
* Templating
* Custom bindings

Pretty much everything I've said is covered in their great [documentation](http://knockoutjs.com/documentation/introduction.html).

