---
layout: post
title: "Elevator Pitch - Express.js"
description: "Fast high level summary of Express JS"
tagline: "Fast high level summary of Express JS"
category: programming
tags: [programming, digital services]
---

As I touched on in my [Node JS]({{ site.url }}/programming/2018/05/02/Node.html) pitch, with Node we have a platform to build fully Javascript applications, even all the way down to the database layer if we use a JSON based DB like [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com). **Express JS** exists to make development on Node faster and easier.

# Express JS

A web application framework for Node JS, which utilises the HTTP module for Node I talked about in the previous blog. 

#### What it is 
* Easy to configure
* Great for building both front-end applications and API's
* Easy to integrate with template engines (e.g. Pug, Handlebars, Mustache)
* Easy to connect with DB layers

# Express 101
Express can be installed using [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/). with `npm install express`

In the previous Node JS blog, we were able to spin up a web server to handle our requests to port 8080. The same thing can be achieved, and then some, with Express like so:
```js
// app.js
const express = require('express');
var app = express();

app.get('/', function (req, res) {
    res.send('Hello World');
});

var server = app.listen(8080, function () {
    console.log('Node server is running..');
});
```

As you can see this is quite similar to the set-up we did in the Node blog, the difference being at the top we've included the Express module and initialised it to a variable called app, this has given us an Express application context which we can then define routes on easily. 

An important part of the Express ecosystem is **Middleware**, you can think of them as chainable functions that run between the client request and the server response. They can:
* Execute code
* Make changes to the `req` and `res` objects
* End the request-response cycle or trigger the next middleware function in the stack

Some examples of the built in middleware with Express is:
* [express.static](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#express.static) serves static assets such as HTML files, images, and so on.
* [express.json](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#express.json) parses incoming requests with JSON payloads.
* [express.urlencoded](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#express.urlencoded) parses incoming requests with URL-encoded payloads.

Another middleware module which is particularly useful is [body-parser](https://github.com/expressjs/body-parser) which allows us to easily parse incoming request bodies. Like any module, it can be installed using NPM `npm install body-parser`and here's how we could use it in combination with Express to create a basic REST API.

```js
// app.js
const express = require('express');
var app = express();

var bodyParser = require("body-parser");
app.use(bodyParser.urlencoded({ extended: false }));

app.get('/apples', function (req, res) {
  var apples = fake_db.apples.get();
  res.status(200).send(apples);
});

app.get('/apples/:id', function (req, res) {
  var apple = fake_db.apples.get(req.params.id);

  if (apple) {
    res.status(200).send(apple);
  } else {
    res.status(404).send("Apple not found");
  }
});

app.post('/apples', function (req, res) {
  var apple = {'color:': req.body.color, 'brand': req.body.brand};

  result = fake_db.create(apple);
  res.status(201).send(result);
});

app.put('/apples/:id', function (req, res) {
  var apple = {'color:': req.body.color, 'brand': req.body.brand};

  result = fake_db.apples.update(req.params.id, apple);
  res.status(200).send(result);
});

app.delete('/apples/:id', function (req, res) {
  result = fake_db.apples.delete(req.params.id);
  res.status(200).send(result);
});

var server = app.listen(8080, function () {
  console.log('Node server is running..');
});
```

So you can see with Express we can quickly define routes and the methods that can be performed on them, furthermore the `bodyParser` middleware module gave us easy access to request bodies through `req.body`. 

# Template Engines

When it comes to web front-ends in Express, using a template engine enables you to use static template files which at runtime are transformed into HTML files, this includes populating any variables defined in a template file with actual values. This approach makes it easier to design an HTML page and is especially useful in combination with REST API's where you could define one template to represent many resources of the same type.  As a quick example, we will use the [pug](https://www.npmjs.com/package/pug) template engine, again this can be installed via NPM `npm install pug`

We can define a template and use it in our Express application like so, in this example I've created a folder in my project called `views` which contains the template file:
```html
// index.pug
html
  head
    title=title
  body
    h1= message

```
And then in my Express application I can do:

```js
// app.js
const express = require('express');
var app = express();

app.set('views', './views')
app.set('view engine', 'pug')

app.get('/', function (req, res) {
  res.render('index', { title: 'Hello World', message: 'Welcome to my website!' })
})
```

When you make a request to the '/' page, the index.pug file will be rendered as HTML.